docs/usage.md, before:

# Greentic Pack Usage Guide

This guide expands on the README with end-to-end instructions for building
Greentic packs and integrating them with the MCP runtime.

## Installing the CLI

Fetch the prebuilt release binaries via `cargo-binstall`:

```bash
cargo install cargo-binstall   # run once
cargo binstall greentic-pack packc
```

The install brings in `greentic-pack`, `gtpack-inspect`, and `packc`; once
installed they're available on your `PATH`.

## Workflow overview

1. **Author a pack manifest** – create `pack.yaml` with metadata, `flow_files`,
   optional `template_dirs`, and (legacy) `imports_required` entries.
2. **Write flows** – author `.ygtc` files that orchestrate conversation
   behaviour. Flows should reference MCP tools using `mcp.exec` nodes so the
   host can negotiate tool execution at runtime.
3. **Add templates** – drop supplementary assets (markdown, prompts, UI
   fragments) under directories listed in `template_dirs`.
4. **Run `packc`** – build the pack artifacts locally. The CLI validates the
   manifest, fingerprints flows/templates, writes a CBOR manifest, and emits a
   Wasm component backed by the generated `data.rs` payload.
5. **Ship the artifacts** – publish the resulting Wasm module (`pack.wasm`) and
   manifest/SBOM outputs to the desired distribution channel.

For declaring providers inside `pack.yaml`, see
`docs/events-provider-packs.md`. The provider extension is optional and
validated by `packc lint`; scaffold a starter pack with `greentic-dev pack
new-provider` and inspect it with `greentic-pack providers list --pack <path>`.

For repo-oriented packs (source/scanner/signing/attestation/policy/oci),
see `docs/repo-pack-types.md` for the schema, capabilities, and bindings
requirements.

## CLI reference

`packc` exposes a `build` subcommand with structured flags:

```text
Usage: packc build --in <DIR> [--out <FILE>] [--manifest <FILE>]
                   [--sbom <FILE>] [--gtpack-out <FILE>] [--component-data <FILE>]
                   [--dry-run] [--log <LEVEL>]
```

- `--in` – path to the pack directory containing `pack.yaml`.
- `--out` – location for the compiled Wasm component (default `dist/pack.wasm`).
- `--manifest` – CBOR manifest output (default `dist/manifest.cbor`).
- `--sbom` – CycloneDX JSON report capturing flow/template hashes (default
  `dist/sbom.cdx.json`).
- `--gtpack-out` – optional path to the `.gtpack` archive that packages the
  manifest, SBOM, flows, templates, and compiled component.
- `--component-data` – override the generated `data.rs` location if you need to
  export the payload somewhere other than `crates/pack_component/src/data.rs`.
- `--dry-run` – validate inputs without writing artifacts or compiling Wasm.
- `--secrets-req` – optional JSON/YAML file with additional secret
  requirements (migration bridge).
- `--default-secret-scope` – dev-only helper to fill missing secret scopes
  (format: `ENV/TENANT[/TEAM]`).
- `--log` – customise the tracing filter (defaults to `info`).
- `--offline` – hard-disable any network activity (highest precedence; also see `GREENTIC_PACK_OFFLINE`).
- `--cache-dir` – override the packc cache root (default: `<pack_dir>/.packc/`; env: `GREENTIC_PACK_CACHE_DIR`).

`packc` writes structured progress logs to stderr. When invoking inside CI, pass
`--dry-run` to skip Wasm compilation if the target toolchain is unavailable.
Use `packc config` to print the resolved configuration, provenance, and any
warnings (add `--json` for machine-readable output).

### Inspecting packs

`packc inspect` reads either a `.gtpack` archive (`--pack`) or a source
directory (`--in`, containing `pack.yaml`). Source mode shells out to
`packc build --gtpack-out` in a temp dir to guarantee parity with archive
inspection. Examples:

```bash
# Inspect a built archive
packc inspect --pack dist/demo.gtpack --json

# Inspect a source tree without prebuilding artifacts
packc inspect --in examples/weather-demo
```

Output defaults to a human-readable summary (pack id/version/name, messaging
adapters, component count, warnings). Pass `--json` to emit the full manifest as
pretty JSON. Signature verification uses the dev policy when inspecting
archives.

### GUI pack converter (Loveable)

`packc gui loveable-convert` turns a Loveable-generated app into a GUI `.gtpack`.

Key flags:

- `--pack-kind <layout|auth|feature|skin|telemetry>`
- `--id <pack-id>` and `--version <semver>`
- one of `--repo-url`, `--dir`, or `--assets-dir` (skip build)
- optional build overrides: `--package-dir`, `--install-cmd`, `--build-cmd`, `--build-dir`
- routing overrides: repeat `--route /path:file.html` (or `--routes path:html,...`)
- `--spa true|false` to override SPA detection
- `--out` (alias `--output`) for the resulting `.gtpack`

Example (using prebuilt assets):

```bash
packc gui loveable-convert \
  --pack-kind feature \
  --id greentic.demo.gui \
  --version 0.1.0 \
  --assets-dir ./dist \
  --out ./dist/demo.gtpack
```

## Scaffolding new packs

`packc new` bootstraps a directory that already matches the expected manifest
and flow layout:

```bash
packc new hello-pack --dir ./hello-pack
cd hello-pack
./scripts/build.sh
```

The command writes `pack.yaml`, `flows/welcome.ygtc`, `.gitignore`, a helper
script under `scripts/build.sh`, and a `dist/` output directory. Passing
`--sign` also drops a development Ed25519 keypair under `keys/` (set
`GREENTIC_DEV_SEED` for deterministic output). Re-run `./scripts/build.sh` to
generate `dist/<id>.wasm`, `dist/manifest.cbor`, `dist/sbom.cdx.json`, and
`dist/<id>.gtpack` (matching your pack id).

## Example build

```bash
rustup target add wasm32-wasip2   # run once
cargo run -p packc --bin packc -- build \
  --in examples/weather-demo \
  --out dist/pack.wasm \
  --manifest dist/manifest.cbor \
  --sbom dist/sbom.cdx.json \
  --gtpack-out dist/demo.gtpack
```

Outputs:

- `dist/pack.wasm` – a Wasm component exporting `greentic:pack-export` stub
  methods backed by the embedded data bundle.
- `dist/manifest.cbor` – canonical pack manifest suitable for transmission.
- `dist/sbom.cdx.json` – CycloneDX summary documenting flows/templates.
- `crates/pack_component/src/data.rs` – regenerated Rust source containing raw
  bytes for the manifest, flow sources, and templates.
- `.packc/mcp/<id>/component.wasm` – merged MCP adapter+router components for
  each `mcp_components` entry.

When you pass `--gtpack-out`, packc calls `greentic-pack` to write the
canonical `.gtpack` archive. Use
`cargo run -p greentic-pack --bin gtpack-inspect -- --policy devok --json dist/demo.gtpack`
to inspect the archive, confirm the SBOM entries have media types, and ensure
the flows/templates match what was written into `dist/pack.wasm`.

## Planning deployments

`greentic-pack` ships a complementary CLI for inspecting archives and producing
provider-agnostic deployment plans:

```bash
greentic-pack plan dist/demo.gtpack \
  --tenant tenant-demo \
  --environment prod
```

The planner always consumes a `.gtpack` archive to guarantee parity between
local dev, CI, and operators. For convenience `plan` also accepts a pack source
directory; in that case it invokes `packc build --gtpack-out` internally to
create a temporary archive before running the planner. Set the
`GREENTIC_PACK_PLAN_PACKC` environment variable if `packc` is not on `PATH`.
When available, the planner pulls aggregated secret requirements from
`secret-requirements.json` inside the archive; otherwise it falls back to the
component manifests bundled in the pack.

## MCP components and flows

- Declare MCP routers under `mcp_components` in `pack.yaml` with an `id`,
  `router_ref`, and optional `protocol`/`adapter_template` (defaults:
  `25.06.18` + `default`).
- `router_ref` must be a local file path (relative to the pack root). OCI or
  remote router references are not supported yet.
- `packc build` composes the MCP adapter template for the chosen protocol with
  each router using `wasm-tools compose`, emitting merged
  `greentic:component@0.4.0` artifacts under `.packc/mcp/<id>/component.wasm`.
- Override the default adapter by setting
  `GREENTIC_PACK_ADAPTER_25_06_18=/path/to/adapter.component.wasm` when needed.
- packc pins a specific MCP adapter reference internally (`MCP_ADAPTER_25_06_18`);
  current image: `ghcr.io/greentic-ai/greentic-mcp-adapter:25.06.18-v0.4.4`
  (digest to be added when published).
- Use `mcp.exec` nodes to describe remote actions. Set the `component` field to
  the `mcp_components.id` you defined; the merged component handles the
  adapter-to-router wiring.
- Pipe user input into node arguments through the `in` variables and reference
  pack parameters for defaults (e.g. `parameters.days_default`).

Example snippet from the bundled weather demo:

```yaml
forecast_weather:
  mcp.exec:
    component: "weather_api"
    action: "forecast_weather"
    args:
      q: in.q_location
      days: parameters.days_default
routing:
  - to: weather_text
```

### Flow-to-flow invocation

Introduce hierarchical logic by delegating to another flow via the reserved
`flow.call` component. It takes a `flow_id` (the `id` of another entry in
`flow_files`) plus an optional `input` object. The called flow executes with a
fresh context and returns its final payload to the caller:

```yaml
call_specialist:
  flow.call:
    flow_id: parameters.answer_flow_id
    input:
      question: collect_question.payload.q_problem
      profile: lookup_context.payload.value
  routing:
    - to: respond_to_user
```

### Session-aware prompts

Components such as `qa.process` issue a `session.update` under the hood when
they need real user input. The runner persists the execution state, pauses the
flow, and resumes once the user replies. Pack authors simply route the node’s
outputs; no special wiring is required beyond ensuring the incoming activity
includes a user identifier so the runner can find the paused session.

### Multi-message replies

Any node may yield an array payload to emit multiple outbound activities from a
single execution pass. This is handy for “thinking” style responses where an
LLM first shares intermediate reasoning before the final answer:

```yaml
respond_to_user:
  messaging.emit:
    messages: call_specialist.payload    # array of message objects
  routing:
    - out: true
```

The runner preserves order, sending each entry to the channel sequentially.
See `examples/qa-demo` for a complete pack that combines all three patterns.

## Distribution bundles and software components

- Use `kind: distribution-bundle` when producing offline bundles; include a `distribution` section with `bundle_id` (optional), `tenant` (opaque JSON map, conventionally serialized TenantCtx), `environment_ref`, `desired_state_version`, `components`, and optional `platform_components`.
- Components may carry `kind: software` plus optional `artifact_type`/`tags`/`platform`/`entrypoint`; `artifact_path` is a generic path inside the `.gtpack`. The pack tooling does not assume WASM—downstream tools decide how to execute or install.

## Component integration

The generated `pack_component` crate exposes helper functions for host runtimes
and targets `wasm32-wasip2`, so it can be instantiated using the WASI Preview 2
ABI. It depends on the host bindings from `greentic-interfaces-host` and
implements the `greentic:pack-export` WIT (see
`greentic_interfaces_host::bindings::exports::greentic::interfaces_pack::component_api::ProviderMeta`),
meaning no extra WIT files are required in this repository.

- `manifest_cbor()` – raw CBOR manifest bytes.
- `manifest_value()` / `manifest_as<T>()` – JSON/typed views of the manifest.
- `flows()` / `templates()` – iterate embedded resources.
- `Component` – an implementation of the `greentic:pack-export` interface with
  stubbed execution hooks ready for future expansion.

Hosts are expected to load `pack.wasm`, instantiate the component, call
`list_flows`, and use MCP to execute the declared `mcp.exec` nodes.

## CI tips

- Run `cargo fmt --all` and `cargo clippy --workspace` locally before pushing.
- Add `--dry-run` to CI invocations of `packc build` if the Wasm toolchain is
  not provisioned.
- Keep example packs up to date; tests use `examples/weather-demo` as a contract
  to ensure generated artifacts capture MCP nodes correctly.

## Troubleshooting

| Issue | Resolution |
| ----- | ---------- |
| `Rust target 'wasm32-wasip2' is not installed` | Run `rustup target add wasm32-wasip2` once before building without `--dry-run`. |
| CLI fails with duplicate flow/template IDs | Ensure each entry in `flow_files` and `template_dirs` maps to unique logical paths. |
| Missing MCP tool at runtime | Confirm the host has loaded the proper MCP component; packs should never embed the tool implementation. |

Commit message:

v0.4.31
adding packc components and update

docs/usage.md, after:

# Greentic Pack Usage Guide

This guide expands on the README with end-to-end instructions for building
Greentic packs and integrating them with the MCP runtime.

## Installing the CLI

Fetch the prebuilt release binaries via `cargo-binstall`:

```bash
cargo install cargo-binstall   # run once
cargo binstall greentic-pack packc
```

The install brings in `greentic-pack`, `gtpack-inspect`, and `packc`; once
installed they're available on your `PATH`.

## Workflow overview

1. **Author a pack manifest** – create `pack.yaml` with metadata, `flow_files`,
   optional `template_dirs`, and (legacy) `imports_required` entries.
2. **Write flows** – author `.ygtc` files that orchestrate conversation
   behaviour. Flows should reference MCP tools using `mcp.exec` nodes so the
   host can negotiate tool execution at runtime.
3. **Add templates** – drop supplementary assets (markdown, prompts, UI
   fragments) under directories listed in `template_dirs`.
4. **Run `packc`** – build the pack artifacts locally. The CLI validates the
   manifest, fingerprints flows/templates, writes a CBOR manifest, and emits a
   Wasm component backed by the generated `data.rs` payload.
5. **Ship the artifacts** – publish the resulting Wasm module (`pack.wasm`) and
   manifest/SBOM outputs to the desired distribution channel.

For declaring providers inside `pack.yaml`, see
`docs/events-provider-packs.md`. The provider extension is optional and
validated by `packc lint`; scaffold a starter pack with `greentic-dev pack
new-provider` and inspect it with `greentic-pack providers list --pack <path>`.

For repo-oriented packs (source/scanner/signing/attestation/policy/oci),
see `docs/repo-pack-types.md` for the schema, capabilities, and bindings
requirements.

## CLI reference

`packc` exposes a `build` subcommand with structured flags:

```text
Usage: packc build --in <DIR> [--out <FILE>] [--manifest <FILE>]
                   [--sbom <FILE>] [--gtpack-out <FILE>] [--component-data <FILE>]
                   [--dry-run] [--log <LEVEL>]
```

- `--in` – path to the pack directory containing `pack.yaml`.
- `--out` – location for the compiled Wasm component (default `dist/pack.wasm`).
- `--manifest` – CBOR manifest output (default `dist/manifest.cbor`).
- `--sbom` – CycloneDX JSON report capturing flow/template hashes (default
  `dist/sbom.cdx.json`).
- `--gtpack-out` – optional path to the `.gtpack` archive that packages the
  manifest, SBOM, flows, templates, and compiled component.
- `--component-data` – override the generated `data.rs` location if you need to
  export the payload somewhere other than `crates/pack_component/src/data.rs`.
- `--dry-run` – validate inputs without writing artifacts or compiling Wasm.
- `--secrets-req` – optional JSON/YAML file with additional secret
  requirements (migration bridge).
- `--default-secret-scope` – dev-only helper to fill missing secret scopes
  (format: `ENV/TENANT[/TEAM]`).
- `--log` – customise the tracing filter (defaults to `info`).
- `--offline` – hard-disable any network activity (highest precedence; also see `GREENTIC_PACK_OFFLINE`).
- `--cache-dir` – override the packc cache root (default: `<pack_dir>/.packc/`; env: `GREENTIC_PACK_CACHE_DIR`).

`packc` writes structured progress logs to stderr. When invoking inside CI, pass
`--dry-run` to skip Wasm compilation if the target toolchain is unavailable.
Use `packc config` to print the resolved configuration, provenance, and any
warnings (add `--json` for machine-readable output).

### Inspecting packs

`packc inspect` reads either a `.gtpack` archive (`--pack`) or a source
directory (`--in`, containing `pack.yaml`). Source mode shells out to
`packc build --gtpack-out` in a temp dir to guarantee parity with archive
inspection. Examples:

```bash
# Inspect a built archive
packc inspect --pack dist/demo.gtpack --json

# Inspect a source tree without prebuilding artifacts
packc inspect --in examples/weather-demo
```

Output defaults to a human-readable summary (pack id/version/name, messaging
adapters, component count, warnings). Pass `--json` to emit the full manifest as
pretty JSON. Signature verification uses the dev policy when inspecting
archives.

### GUI pack converter (Loveable)

`packc gui loveable-convert` turns a Loveable-generated app into a GUI `.gtpack`.

Key flags:

- `--pack-kind <layout|auth|feature|skin|telemetry>`
- `--id <pack-id>` and `--version <semver>`
- one of `--repo-url`, `--dir`, or `--assets-dir` (skip build)
- optional build overrides: `--package-dir`, `--install-cmd`, `--build-cmd`, `--build-dir`
- routing overrides: repeat `--route /path:file.html` (or `--routes path:html,...`)
- `--spa true|false` to override SPA detection
- `--out` (alias `--output`) for the resulting `.gtpack`

Example (using prebuilt assets):

```bash
packc gui loveable-convert \
  --pack-kind feature \
  --id greentic.demo.gui \
  --version 0.1.0 \
  --assets-dir ./dist \
  --out ./dist/demo.gtpack
```

## Scaffolding new packs

`packc new` bootstraps a directory that already matches the expected manifest
and flow layout:

```bash
packc new hello-pack --dir ./hello-pack
cd hello-pack
packc build --in . --dry-run
```

The command writes `pack.yaml`, `flows/main.ygtc`, and an empty
`components/` directory (no stub `.wasm` is generated). Populate
`components/` with your compiled Wasm components and add additional flows as
needed, then run `packc update --in .` to refresh `pack.yaml`.

## Example build

```bash
rustup target add wasm32-wasip2   # run once
cargo run -p packc --bin packc -- build \
  --in examples/weather-demo \
  --out dist/pack.wasm \
  --manifest dist/manifest.cbor \
  --sbom dist/sbom.cdx.json \
  --gtpack-out dist/demo.gtpack
```

Outputs:

- `dist/pack.wasm` – a Wasm component exporting `greentic:pack-export` stub
  methods backed by the embedded data bundle.
- `dist/manifest.cbor` – canonical pack manifest suitable for transmission.
- `dist/sbom.cdx.json` – CycloneDX summary documenting flows/templates.
- `crates/pack_component/src/data.rs` – regenerated Rust source containing raw
  bytes for the manifest, flow sources, and templates.
- `.packc/mcp/<id>/component.wasm` – merged MCP adapter+router components for
  each `mcp_components` entry.

When you pass `--gtpack-out`, packc calls `greentic-pack` to write the
canonical `.gtpack` archive. Use
`cargo run -p greentic-pack --bin gtpack-inspect -- --policy devok --json dist/demo.gtpack`
to inspect the archive, confirm the SBOM entries have media types, and ensure
the flows/templates match what was written into `dist/pack.wasm`.

## Planning deployments

`greentic-pack` ships a complementary CLI for inspecting archives and producing
provider-agnostic deployment plans:

```bash
greentic-pack plan dist/demo.gtpack \
  --tenant tenant-demo \
  --environment prod
```

The planner always consumes a `.gtpack` archive to guarantee parity between
local dev, CI, and operators. For convenience `plan` also accepts a pack source
directory; in that case it invokes `packc build --gtpack-out` internally to
create a temporary archive before running the planner. Set the
`GREENTIC_PACK_PLAN_PACKC` environment variable if `packc` is not on `PATH`.
When available, the planner pulls aggregated secret requirements from
`secret-requirements.json` inside the archive; otherwise it falls back to the
component manifests bundled in the pack.

## MCP components and flows

- Declare MCP routers under `mcp_components` in `pack.yaml` with an `id`,
  `router_ref`, and optional `protocol`/`adapter_template` (defaults:
  `25.06.18` + `default`).
- `router_ref` must be a local file path (relative to the pack root). OCI or
  remote router references are not supported yet.
- `packc build` composes the MCP adapter template for the chosen protocol with
  each router using `wasm-tools compose`, emitting merged
  `greentic:component@0.4.0` artifacts under `.packc/mcp/<id>/component.wasm`.
- Override the default adapter by setting
  `GREENTIC_PACK_ADAPTER_25_06_18=/path/to/adapter.component.wasm` when needed.
- packc pins a specific MCP adapter reference internally (`MCP_ADAPTER_25_06_18`);
  current image: `ghcr.io/greentic-ai/greentic-mcp-adapter:25.06.18-v0.4.4`
  (digest to be added when published).
- Use `mcp.exec` nodes to describe remote actions. Set the `component` field to
  the `mcp_components.id` you defined; the merged component handles the
  adapter-to-router wiring.
- Pipe user input into node arguments through the `in` variables and reference
  pack parameters for defaults (e.g. `parameters.days_default`).

Example snippet from the bundled weather demo:

```yaml
forecast_weather:
  mcp.exec:
    component: "weather_api"
    action: "forecast_weather"
    args:
      q: in.q_location
      days: parameters.days_default
routing:
  - to: weather_text
```

### Flow-to-flow invocation

Introduce hierarchical logic by delegating to another flow via the reserved
`flow.call` component. It takes a `flow_id` (the `id` of another entry in
`flow_files`) plus an optional `input` object. The called flow executes with a
fresh context and returns its final payload to the caller:

```yaml
call_specialist:
  flow.call:
    flow_id: parameters.answer_flow_id
    input:
      question: collect_question.payload.q_problem
      profile: lookup_context.payload.value
  routing:
    - to: respond_to_user
```

### Session-aware prompts

Components such as `qa.process` issue a `session.update` under the hood when
they need real user input. The runner persists the execution state, pauses the
flow, and resumes once the user replies. Pack authors simply route the node’s
outputs; no special wiring is required beyond ensuring the incoming activity
includes a user identifier so the runner can find the paused session.

### Multi-message replies

Any node may yield an array payload to emit multiple outbound activities from a
single execution pass. This is handy for “thinking” style responses where an
LLM first shares intermediate reasoning before the final answer:

```yaml
respond_to_user:
  messaging.emit:
    messages: call_specialist.payload    # array of message objects
  routing:
    - out: true
```

The runner preserves order, sending each entry to the channel sequentially.
See `examples/qa-demo` for a complete pack that combines all three patterns.

## Distribution bundles and software components

- Use `kind: distribution-bundle` when producing offline bundles; include a `distribution` section with `bundle_id` (optional), `tenant` (opaque JSON map, conventionally serialized TenantCtx), `environment_ref`, `desired_state_version`, `components`, and optional `platform_components`.
- Components may carry `kind: software` plus optional `artifact_type`/`tags`/`platform`/`entrypoint`; `artifact_path` is a generic path inside the `.gtpack`. The pack tooling does not assume WASM—downstream tools decide how to execute or install.

## Component integration

The generated `pack_component` crate exposes helper functions for host runtimes
and targets `wasm32-wasip2`, so it can be instantiated using the WASI Preview 2
ABI. It depends on the host bindings from `greentic-interfaces-host` and
implements the `greentic:pack-export` WIT (see
`greentic_interfaces_host::bindings::exports::greentic::interfaces_pack::component_api::ProviderMeta`),
meaning no extra WIT files are required in this repository.

- `manifest_cbor()` – raw CBOR manifest bytes.
- `manifest_value()` / `manifest_as<T>()` – JSON/typed views of the manifest.
- `flows()` / `templates()` – iterate embedded resources.
- `Component` – an implementation of the `greentic:pack-export` interface with
  stubbed execution hooks ready for future expansion.

Hosts are expected to load `pack.wasm`, instantiate the component, call
`list_flows`, and use MCP to execute the declared `mcp.exec` nodes.

## CI tips

- Run `cargo fmt --all` and `cargo clippy --workspace` locally before pushing.
- Add `--dry-run` to CI invocations of `packc build` if the Wasm toolchain is
  not provisioned.
- Keep example packs up to date; tests use `examples/weather-demo` as a contract
  to ensure generated artifacts capture MCP nodes correctly.

## Troubleshooting

| Issue | Resolution |
| ----- | ---------- |
| `Rust target 'wasm32-wasip2' is not installed` | Run `rustup target add wasm32-wasip2` once before building without `--dry-run`. |
| CLI fails with duplicate flow/template IDs | Ensure each entry in `flow_files` and `template_dirs` maps to unique logical paths. |
| Missing MCP tool at runtime | Confirm the host has loaded the proper MCP component; packs should never embed the tool implementation. |
